A textbook response from Clive
and Pat, who limited
contact with others even
before symptoms arose.
They self—isolated and earlier
travelled to a specialist
NHS unit for a swab.
They’ll discover
the results on Monday.
Luke Hanrahan, BBC London.
Well that’s it from me tonight —
now though here’s the weather
with Sarah Keith Lucas.
Good evening.
We saw something of a respite
on Thursday afternoon
into evening with some weather,
but it won’t last too long
as Storm Jorge is set to bring
increasingly wet and windy weather
through Friday and into
the weekend as well.
It is dry and clear out there
at the moment, and it’s cold too.
Expect temperatures a few degrees
below freezing first
thing tomorrow morning.
Certainly a touch of frost,
there could be the odd icy stretch.
After that cold, dry start,
the cloud will increase quite
quickly and the rain will move
in from the west.
It will be patchy rain
on and off through the day,
and although temperatures are up
to about 10—11 degrees,
it’ll feel cooler in the breeze.
Here’s an outlook of the weather now
in London over the next seven days.
I’ll pass you to Phil Avery to take
you through the national forecast.
Hello. Just as some of you are
Hello. just as some of you are
getting your
Hello. Just as some of you are
getting your first taste of winter,
this winter but February will revert
to type.
to type, so far this February
anyway. Friday and Saturday, more
wind and rain and disruption is
wind and rain and dismption is
likely. We
wind and rain and disruption is
likely. We have another named storm
dose by. Friday
close by. Friday starts chilly and
dose by. Friday starts chilly and
dry to the
close by. Friday starts chilly and
dry to the east, to the west, cloudy
and wet and mild air
and wet and mild airfrom the word
and wet and mild air from the word
go and by
and wet and mild airfrom the word
go and by lunchtime, we will all
have heavy rain at times and that is
part of the concern, the Environment
Agency will be all over the
situation. Increasingly mild on the
south—westerly winds but there will
south-westerty winds but there will
be planty of
south—westerly winds but there will
be plenty of wind, so it is a double
be planty of wind, so it is a double
whammy.
be plenty of wind, so it is a double
whammy. Another cold front works
across the British Isles during the
night, wrapped around the named
storm, named by the stamp Spanish,
hence the name, Jorge. The isobars
hence the name, jorge. The isobars
squeeze tightly
hence the name, Jorge. The isobars
squeeze tightly on Saturday and
there are warnings running on into
there are warnings mnning on into
Sunday for
there are warnings running on into
Sunday for gusty winds. Once the
rain is a way we have this
wraparound of occlusion to bring
more cloud and showery bursts of
rain into western areas on a cold
and miserable day, if you are
and miserabla day, if you are
trapped
and miserable day, if you are
trapped under the cloud. There will
be some sunshine, as indeed there
will be on Sunday, but
will be on Sunday, butJorge is
will be on Sunday, butjorge is
close by to
will be on Sunday, butJorge is
close by to the British Isles and
dose by to the British Isles and
another
close by to the British Isles and
another windy day. It
We’re setting up for
a grand FA Cup tie.
Lovely touch, fabulous goal!
He’s done it again!
A true battle of the giants.
Sheffield Wednesday
have nothing to lose.
Oh, what a lovely goal!
One of the big guns will be gone
from the competition tonight.
The FA Cup Fifth Round.
Well, I’ve never watched this.
Y—You’ve never watched
the documentary that you’re in?
No.
Not really my sort of thing.
Tonight, we are in Middlesbrough.
Welcome to Question Time.
On tonight’s panel, Nadhim Zahawi,
the government Business and Industry
Minister, formerly children and
families minister under Theresa May.
labour
Labour Shadow Health Secretary since
labour Shadow Health Secretary since
2016,
Labour Shadow Health Secretary since
2016, former adviser to Gordon Brown
and Ed Miliband, Jon Ashworth.
and Ed Miliband, jon Ashworth.
Alison
and Ed Miliband, Jon Ashworth.
Alison Phillips, 3
Alison Phillips, a journalist from
student newspapers and national
titles like the Sunday people, now
titles like the Sunday peopla, now
editor
titles like the Sunday people, new
editor of the Daily Mirror. Ayesha
Vardag, celebrity divorce lawyer
known for making prenup agreements
an accepted part of the law in
England, described by Time magazine
is the diva of divorce. And
is the dive of divorce. And
co—founder of the big issue
co-founder of the big issue
magazine,
co—founder of the big issue
magazine, John Bird.
Welcome to our panel, to the
audience here and to you at home.
You ran
You ranjoin in the
audience here and to you at home.
You canjoin in the conversation on
You ranjoin in the conversation on
social
You canjoin in the conversation on
social media at BBC Question Time.
Let’s take the first question from
Dawn Galloway. Given to the current
strains on the NHS, is the
government for a coronavirus
government for a coronavims
pandemic?
government for a coronavirus
pandemic? Figures are going up and
up. jon
up. Jon Ashworth? Well, it’s an
excellent question, and that is what
we are all asking ourselves, aren’t
we? Coronavirus now has turned from
we? Coronavims now has turned from
a serious
we? Coronavirus now has turned from
a serious service issue for China to
potentially massive trauma for the
world. It’s going to have huge
impact on the global economy and
probably slow global growth and
trade but, most significantly, it
looks like we are now heading for a
health crisis, a pandemic, and the
World Health Organisation have
warned countries to prepare for a
pandemic. Now, our
pandemic. Now, ourthoughts
pandemic. Now, our thoughts
obviously
pandemic. Now, ourthoughts
obviously have to be with the
patients who have got the virus at
the moment here, and all the NHS
staff and Public Health England
staff, who are working exceptionally
hard. As it happens, funnily enough,
despite what I normally come on
these shows and say, I don’t have
any criticism so far of the
government and NHS England’s
handling of this crisis. I have been
broadly supportive of the
government’s approach. But the key
thing is this. We know, after ten
years of cutbacks and austerity, ten
years of cutting over 15,000 beds in
the NHS, ten years of failing to
the NHS, ten years offailing to
recmit
the NHS, ten years of failing to
recruit the staff we need, we are
recmit the staff we need, we are
short of
recruit the staff we need, we are
short of 40,000 nurses, for example,
and we know our NHS is under
considerable strain let me give you
considerabla strain let me give you
a quick fact,
considerable strain let me give you
a quick fact, the numbers waiting on
a trolley in a corridor in a
hospital because they can’t get a
bed, in the last year of the Labour
bed, in the last year of the labour
government,
bed, in the last year of the Labour
government, that was around 61,000.
In the last year of this
Conservative government, it wasn’t
61,000, it was 850,000. That’s the
stale
scale of the deterioration in the
NHS under the Tories. Last week, 80%
NHS under the Tories. Last week, 8096
of critical
NHS under the Tories. Last week, 80%
of critical care beds were occupied.
of critical rare beds were occupied.
It meant
of critical care beds were occupied.
It meant that last week there was
around 700 critical care beds free,
around 700 critical rare beds free,
about
around 700 critical care beds free,
about three or four per hospital, so
there are now serious questions for
the government that if, and it is
still a big if, if this coronavirus
hits us and it becomes a pandemic,
randy NHS
candy NHS cope if they don’t put
randy NHS cope if they don’t put
some
candy NHS cope if they don’t put
some extra emergency funding
because, at the moment, the NHS is
under huge strain and pressure after
years of Tory cutbacks.
APPLAUSE
So, Nadhim Zahawi, and we were
hearing the Health Secretary, Matt
Hancock, saying that the NHS is
prepared and in excellent shape to
deal with it. During some of what
jon has said,
Jon has said, and what NHS staff
jon has said, and what NHS staff
have
Jon has said, and what NHS staff
have been saying about how tough
things are, should we get into a
position where the coronavirus
situation becomes worse, and we
don’t know if it will, will be NHS
cope? We have now been preparing for
a number of weeks. We have a Cobra
meeting every week and I am the lead
minister
ministerfor the
meeting every week and I am the lead
minister for the department of
business because of the critical
infrastructure for the UK and
businesses like the automotive
sector and retail, but the question
was about the NHS. We have tested
7000 people to date. The NHS has
been coping incredibly well, and I
pay tribute to the nurses and
doctors and all the staff that have
made this possible, so the NHS has
been coping well. But the question
is, if it should get worse, where
will the staff and the beds come
from? The reason we have been having
a Cobra meeting every week, and the
Secretary of State for Health as a
Cabinet update every week, and
updates the Prime Minister every
day, and for example, in my
department, I have stood up a team
of doing this in every sector every
day, that’s because we have to make
preparations for the worst case
preparations for the worst rase
scenario, it
preparations for the worst case
scenario, it has to be plentiful
scenario, it has to be plantiful
carefully.
Have we got enough beds? Well, jon
is wrong,
Have we got enough beds? Well, Jon
is wrong, because we got 100,000
acute beds, and he should know that
as shadow minister. Started well by
saying he was back in the minister
on this issue. Of course, the NHS be
under more pressure, but the reason
we have made these preparations,
working across the whole of
government, every department, we are
at Cobra every week to do this,
that’s because we have been making
these preparations, because you have
to prepare for the best worst case
to prepare for the best worst rase
scenario
to prepare for the best worst case
scenario so we are ready. We have a
phenomenal team of people in public
of England who are doing this work.
We have to prepare for the best
worst case scenario, we will be
worst rase scenario, we will be
ready for it. I’m
worst case scenario, we will be
ready for it. I’m not wrong on bed
numbers. We have lost about 17,000
beds since 2010, and the key thing
is the critical care beds. They were
is the critical rare beds. They were
at 801:
is the critical care beds. They were
at 80% occupancy last week, which
at 8096 occupancy last week, which
meant
at 80% occupancy last week, which
meant there were about 700
available. We also have a more
serious level of beds, and we only
have about 15 of those, Ecmo. On the
acute measure you used, your
acute measure you used, yourfigures
acute measure you used, your figures
are broadly
acute measure you used, yourfigures
are broadly correct, but most
hospitals are running at about 95%
hospitals are mnning at about 9596
occupancy on
hospitals are running at about 95%
occupancy on those beds. You should
also recognise, in the last five
days, what we did was make it the
law of the land that the additional
3A billion a year of funding will be
34 billion a year offunding will be
there for
3A billion a year of funding will be
there for the NHS. That’s not
enough. You spent ten years running
enough. You spent ten years mnning
down the
enough. You spent ten years running
down the NHS!
APPLAUSE
Can I ask you one thing?
(“an I ask you one thing? This is not
in any sense to try
Can I ask you one thing? This is not
in any sense to try and overstate
the issue, because we are not in a
pandemic at this stage, but should
it become more serious in this
country, are the military on
standby? Every department is at
Cobra every week.
Cobra every week. So the military as
well? Every department is working
together and we are making
preparations for best worst case
preparations for best worst rase
scenario,
preparations for best worst case
scenario, because that’s the
responsible thing to do. If people
responsible thing to do. If peopla
have
responsible thing to do. If people
have been diagnosed with
coronavirus, would they be put into
coronavims, would they be put into
a normal
coronavirus, would they be put into
a normal hospital or would they buy
isolated in a specialist unit?
jessira
Jessica would they be isolated. I’m
jessira would they be isolated. I’m
going to have a
Jessica would they be isolated. I’m
going to have a go around the
audience for other questions,. The
man behind you. I think we are still
thinking in terms of national or
[oral issue,
local issue, when it’s really a
global thing.
globalthing. I believe
local issue, when it’s really a
global thing. I believe that we
should forget politics for the
moment and consider it as a global
thing and deal with the countries
and try to tackle this pressure,
rather than just looking at it in
[oral
local terms.
APPLAUSE
Yes, with the glasses at the back.
If the NHS is struggling so much,
If the NHS is stmggling so much,
should
If the NHS is struggling so much,
should we not reduce the struggle by
stopping trouble? I’ll take one
stopping troubla? I’ll take one
more.
stopping trouble? I’ll take one
more. Where will the staff come from
more. where will the staff come from
to cover
more. Where will the staff come from
to cover the extra workload that
this pandemic might cause? That’s a
lot of questions for you. I will go
round the panel first. I think we
are now at a point where this is
becoming a really serious concern to
many people. Particularly to the
many peopla. Particularty to the
elderty or
many people. Particularly to the
elderly or people with existing
health conditions or people with
health conditions or peopla with
very young
health conditions or people with
very young children. Although I
think preparedness has seemed good
so far, there are still stories we
have heard at the Mirror from GP is
still uncertain about information to
give out, but generally the
containment seems to be going well.
But we know that there is no slack
in our NHS now. We have had ten
years where the funding has not been
there. We know that something like
25% of people who go into A&E at the
2596 of peopla who go into AaE at the
moment
25% of people who go into A&E at the
moment will be on a trolley for more
than four hours. We heard the story
the other day about 93—year—old RAF
the other day about 93-year-old RAF
hero who
the other day about 93—year—old RAF
hero who had to wait on a trolley
for 12 hours, so how will we cope
with that plus coronavirus, plus if
with that plus coronavims, plus if
then we
with that plus coronavirus, plus if
then we have NHS staff becoming ill
or having to go into self isolation?
This is a major, major concern, but
you are quite right that perhaps
this isn’t quite the time for
politic but
politics but ensuring the NHS has
politic but ensuring the NHS has
exactly
politics but ensuring the NHS has
exactly what it needs to get through
this.
APPLAUSE
A pandemic is where something very,
very big happens to the world. In
1919, more people died of influenza
1919, more peopla died of inﬂuenza
than
1919, more people died of influenza
than died in the First World War. 50
than died in the First World War. So
we are talking
than died in the First World War. 50
we are talking about
than died in the First World War. So
we are talking about enormous social
movements. This is not
movements. This is notjust a health
movements. This is not just a health
crisis, it is a
movements. This is notjust a health
crisis, it is a social crisis. To
expect the NHS, irrespective of
whether it had every available bed,
to respond to a crisis that could
[cad
[sad to
to respond to a crisis that could
lead to a rerun of 1919, we need a
lot more. We need the army, we need
all of the private medical
facilities in this country, and
there are many, many, and say to
them, you are in, whether you like
it or not. The nationalisation of
the health service, in the truest
the health service, in the tmest
sense of
the health service, in the truest
sense of the world, for a particular
time, in order to deal with this
pandemic. Deal
pandemic. Dealwith
time, in order to deal with this
pandemic. Deal with this pandemic
simply on the basis that, as our
colleague says, simply on the basis
of the existing services that are
offered by the NHS. We have to look
beyond it. What do you think should
beyond it. what do you think should
happen, john?
beyond it. What do you think should
happen, John? I mean,
happen,John? I mean, I
beyond it. What do you think should
happen, John? I mean, lam one of
happen, john? I mean, lam one of
those people
happen, John? I mean, lam one of
those people who came here and said,
come on, let’s not exaggerate, but
let’s be honest, we don’t want to
exaggerate, we don’t want to look on
it as a breathless crisis. My
brother won’t stay in a hotel in
London now because he doesn’t want
to catch coronavirus. I mean, that’s
a bit silly. But we do have to
nationalise all those facilities in
and around health, we have to
dragoon them in, and look upon it as
though it is a war, a war on getting
rid of this pandemic, and this is
exactly what happened in 1919, and
it caused the death of millions and
millions of people, but the thing
millions of peopla, but the thing
was it
millions of people, but the thing
was it was turned around. It’s worth
saying that the death rate for
Spanish flu was way higher,
exponentially higher than we are
talking about.
talking about. I think we have to
analyse the situation quite coolly,
because, of course, everyone is
afraid of the deadly virus, and
peopla are
people are panicking and changing
peopla are panicking and changing
their plans,
people are panicking and changing
their plans, people are locking
themselves in their homes. We have
to remember that, as best we
understand it at the moment, about
801: of
80% of people are fine. Many of them
8096 of peopla are fine. Many of them
don’t
80% of people are fine. Many of them
don’t even realise they have it,
which is one reason it’s so
difficult to catch. That 15% of
difficult to ratch. That 1596 of
peopla
difficult to catch. That 15% of
people have moderately severe
symptoms are not really at risk, and
about 596
about 5% are really at risk and
about 596 are really at risk and
under
about 5% are really at risk and
under threat.
underthreat. It’s
about 5% are really at risk and
under threat. It’s that 5% we really
under threat. It’s that 596 we really
have to worry
under threat. It’s that 5% we really
have to worry about and look after
"TY
very closely, and that’s what the
NHS has to be very ready for. The
question is, is the government
prepared? Effectively, no one was
prepared for this. There is
generally, I would
generally, Iwould imagine, people
have contingency plans. We had Sars
and Mars
and Mers and swine flu, so there is
and Mers and swine ﬂu, so there is
a sense of
and Mers and swine flu, so there is
a sense of people doing something,
but we all know that the NHS is
underinvested and struggling, and we
need to restructure it. We can’t do
need to restmcture it. We can’t do
that this
need to restructure it. We can’t do
that this week. We have to take a
few emergency measures. You have to
look at things like clearing out
possibla
possible beds. For example,
sometimes hospital beds are used as
an alternative to care because there
an alternative to rare because there
are not
are not proper
an alternative to care because there
are not proper care structures in
are not proper rare structures in
place. We need
are not proper care structures in
place. We need to find quick ways to
get rare
get care structures in place so that
get rare structures in place so that
hospital beds
get care structures in place so that
hospital beds can be used for the
hospital beds ran be used for the
people that
hospital beds can be used for the
people that need them for this
crisis situation. However, what I do
think is that what the government
has done has been quite amazing, in
terms of giving people the autonomy
terms of giving peopla the autonomy
and ability to
terms of giving people the autonomy
and ability to look after themselves
in quite an organised way, the whole
drive through testing schemes, call
drive through testing schemes, all
us and
drive through testing schemes, call
us and we will test you at home,
those things which enable people to
those things which enabla peopla to
look
those things which enable people to
look after themselves, because I
think people in the UK are quite
responsible about things. They look
after themselves and their
neighbours and families, so it’s
giving them the means to do that,
and that’s been a game changer
impaired too, for example, Italy,
which locked the borders very early
which locked the borders very earty
on. But they
which locked the borders very early
on. But they have a lot more cases.
Let’s put some of these cases back
Let’s put some of these rases back
to
Let’s put some of these cases back
to Nadhim Zahawi. Where will the
to Nadhim Zahawi. where will the
staff
to Nadhim Zahawi. Where will the
staff come from? You asked about
isolation units, and we have seen
some at the beginning. Where will
some at the beginning. where will
the
some at the beginning. Where will
the staff come from?
One strategy is to contain and delay
the vims.
the virus. Then of course, you do
the vims. Then of course, you do
the
the virus. Then of course, you do
the research and mitigate. But where
are the stuff coming from? That was
the question.
the question. —— where are the staff
the question. -- where are the staff
coming from?
the question. —— where are the staff
coming from? There are already more
staff in the NHS, but we will work
across the whole of the government.
where
Where are the extra staff going to
where are the extra staff going to
come
Where are the extra staff going to
come from? I don’t know about the
8000 extra nurses, I don’t know if
that is fewer nurses that would have
left.
left, or actually more nurses. But
should there be an increase in the
number of coronavirus cases, do you
accept that there will be a need for
more staff? We plan across
government at Cobra every week. We
know that. You can’t magic up staff
overnight. And the health service is
well equipped and is dealing with
this crisis in a good way. What I am
this crisis in a good way. what I am
trying to say is, if
this crisis in a good way. What I am
trying to say is, if we do get to
the worst—case scenario, we have
the worst-case scenario, we have
plans in place
the worst—case scenario, we have
plans in place across government to
make sure we with it.
make sure we with it. Could we bring
in the private sector? We can do
in the private sector? We ran do
lots of things
in the private sector? We can do
lots of things that are available to
us. The question was about working
internationally on this. The Cobra
team have already put £16
team have already put £45 million to
work through
team have already put £16 million to
work through the Dfid team to other
countries who are not as
well—prepared as we are. Travel
well-prepared as we are. Travel
advice
well—prepared as we are. Travel
advice has also been important. We
have made sure that all our airports
and ports have clear advice and are
monitoring. We are working across
the board to make sure we are ready
if we get to the worst case
scenario. In Venice to the
government, they are following the
advice of the Chief Medical Officer
-- in
—— infairness
advice of the Chief Medical Officer
—— in fairness to the government.
-- in fairness to the government.
That is why I said
—— in fairness to the government.
That is why I said in my remarks
that so far, I don’t have a major
criticism of the approach of the
government, of NHS England and
Pub“:
Public Health England. But as has
just been exposed, if this does turn
into a pandemic, the government
dearty have
clearly have no idea where they will
dearty have no idea where they will
get the staff
clearly have no idea where they will
get the staff for the NHS. We are
already short of 40,000 thousand
nurses. We are already short of
resources. 50
resources. So far, I have been in
support of the government and I pay
tribute to the NHS. But if this
takes a turn for the worse, as we
have just heard, they have no idea
where they will get the staff from
to deal with this. A lot of you
asked about coronavirus, but a lot
asked about coronavims, but a lot
of you also
asked about coronavirus, but a lot
of you also asked about this next
question. Let’s hear
question. Let’s hearfrom Vaughn
question. Let’s hear from Vaughn
Davies. Is
question. Let’s hearfrom Vaughn
Davies. Is the fall in life
expectancy proof that austerity
kills? 50 I think you are referring
kills? So I think you are referring
to a report
kills? 50 I think you are referring
to a report that came out
kills? So I think you are referring
to a report that came out today,
authored by a professor marmot, who
talks about the decrease in life
expectancy. He said the damage to
health and well—being is
unprecedented over the last ten
years. He also said the damage need
not have happened and it is
shocking. He laid the blame mostly
at the door of austerity. Alison?
This report is one of the most
shocking thing is we have read in
many years. One of the most striking
points in the report was that women
in some of the most poor areas in
the north—east of England are likely
the north-east of England are likely
to die
the north—east of England are likely
to die sooner than they would have
done ten years ago. This comes on
the back of historically, we have
always found life expectancy
increasing. Across the board, people
increasing. Across the board, peopla
who earn
increasing. Across the board, people
who earn more are going to live
longer, is the bottom line in this
report. And it does come down to
austerity. It’s a whole combination
austerity. It’s a whola combination
of things in
austerity. It’s a whole combination
of things in many problems now. It
of things in many problams now. It
is not just one
of things in many problems now. It
is notjust one thing, it is a
selection of things. It is poor
housing, job insecurity, the
breakdown of communities, the
breakdown of essential services. All
these things have added to the sense
that the people with less will
that the peopla with lass will
suffer
that the people with less will
suffer more. There is a range of
other issues going on in our
communities as well. There is a
greater sense of isolation and
mental health issues, but so many of
those come back to the knock—on
those come back to the knock-on
effects
those come back to the knock—on
effects of austerity and it is ten
years into this now. Yes, we we have
a government that is committed to
doing all sorts of things to make it
better. But the scale of the
problem, which was created by the
Conservative government, is so great
now and
new and the damage is so
Conservative government, is so great
now and the damage is so enormous to
people’s lives that I wonder whether
they have the ability to turn it
around in the way they have promised
people such as those in the
north—east who voted for them.
north-east who voted for them.
Ayesha? I
north—east who voted for them.
Ayesha? I think it’s tricky, because
Ayesha? Ithink it’s tricky, because
as
asl
Ayesha? I think it’s tricky, because
as I understand from that report,
Mel --
Mel —— male life expectancy was
Mel -- male life expectancy was
going up, it
Mel —— male life expectancy was
going up, it was women that was
going down. Women are now working a
lot more and they are often working
without enough support with their
children and they are trying to do
everything. 50 men are getting
everything. So men are getting
better,
everything. 50 men are getting
better, women are getting worse.
That is something to look at. Of
course we have to think about the
impact of austerity, and I agree
with Alison that we have to look at
what has happened to communities and
the fragmentation and the lack of
connection between people, the
loneliness and unhappiness. As far
as the north—east is concerned, life
as the north-east is concerned, life
expectancy for
as the north—east is concerned, life
expectancy for men has gone down. I
read that for men in some areas, it
had gone up, but I accept what you
are saying. But of course, austerity
does have its impact and I think the
impact on communities has been
grave. It is not
grave. It is notjust austerity. It
grave. It is not just austerity. It
does
grave. It is notjust austerity. It
does combine with other elements
like the general fragmentation, like
people living in their own homes,
peopla living in their own homes,
watching TV
people living in their own homes,
watching TV and not connecting with
peoplc, and
people, and the sense of loneliness
and destabilisation and mental
health, which leads to alcoholism,
dmg abuse,
drug abuse, unhealthy living and
dmg abuse, unhealthy living and
depression.
drug abuse, unhealthy living and
depression. All of that combined
together and we have to fight all of
those things at once. Let’s hear
from some of the people in the
audience. In the north—east, in the
audience. In the north-east, in the
most deprived
audience. In the north—east, in the
most deprived areas, people are
living five years less than the same
areas in London. That is a huge
health injustice. How is the
government proposing to right the
wrongs of the last ten years? I know
in the north—east, women’s life
in the north-east, women’s life
expectancy
in the north—east, women’s life
expectancy has decreased by almost a
year in more or less the last ten
years. In London, it has increased
by about a year. Yes?
by about a year. Yes? My father was
born in 1920. He died in October
last year. He was 99 and three
quarters. His brothers and sisters
all lived to a great age. He ate to
live, he didn’t live to eat. He rode
a bike. It is people now you don’t
a bike. It is peopla now you don’t
do these things.
a bike. It is people now you don’t
do these things. The professor’s
report blamed mostly austerity, but
you think it is lifestyles,
unconnected to austerity? My father
was born in the 19205, which had
austerity and the general strike. He
fought in World War II. My
grandfather fought
grandfatherfought in
fought in World War II. My
grandfather fought in World War I.
He lived till he was 87. My dad live
till. 99. I
till 99. I am still here. Sounds
like you have a very strong gene
pool there. Yes? The lady behind me
in the white was referring to a
report that came out
report that came outlast
in the white was referring to a
report that came out last year where
it said that people in the
north—east actually had lower than
north-east actually had lower than
average life
north—east actually had lower than
average life expectancy than in the
rest of the country. And now on top
of that, it is dropping. We are in
Middlesbrough. I think this city
scores in the top three worst areas
of the country in a number of areas
of social deprivation. Austerity is
killing people here. And it’s about
time that that was seen,
particularly by the Conservative
government who has been doing this
for the last ten years and they take
action to undo that damage.
Considering the drop in life
expectancy, we can’t take much more.
Is this a stain on the record of the
Conservative government, Nadhim? If
we are to have a sustainable debate
about this, it’s worth looking at
the evidence us sensibly. Do you
think these comments have not been
sensible? No, on the country. We
have to do much more. But in 2010,
the Professor’s review then found
that poorer people in poorer places
would die seven years earlier than
would die seven years eartier than
those living in
would die seven years earlier than
those living in the richest places.
He described inequality in health as
unfair. He said there were huge
discrepancies in life expectancy
between rich and poor. But what is
new today is that life expectancy
overall, which has been increasing
for hundreds of years, now is
showing a decrease and he is blaming
austerity from the last ten years
while we had a Conservative
government. Let’s look at the whole
evidence.
evidence. He said it didn’t happen
by chance. I did a bit of research
on this, knowing it would probably
come up tonight. And I am not
mnning away
running away from it. Part of the
mnning away from it. Part of the
reason why we
running away from it. Part of the
reason why we have made it the law
of the land that we put £35 billion
of the land that we put 55 billion
more
of the land that we put £35 billion
more into the NHS is because we have
to deal with some of these
inequalities. 1A billion more into
education. The least well off local
authorities, we have
authorities, we havejust announced
authorities, we have just announced
a massive
authorities, we havejust announced
a massive boost for local
government, 2.9 billion of
additional spending. The least well
off will get 15% more than the more
off will get 1596 more than the more
well off
off will get 15% more than the more
well off local authorities. So yes,
well off [oral authorities. So yes,
there is a
well off local authorities. So yes,
there is a challenge. People in
Middlesbrough deserved for us to be
better
betterfor
Middlesbrough deserved for us to be
better for them.
betterfor them. Many
Middlesbrough deserved for us to be
better for them. Many people trusted
better for them. Many people tmsted
us with
better for them. Many people trusted
us with their vote across the UK and
we have to do better. Was the
austerity policy mistake, then? No.
We had to balance the books. Then
why are you spending the money now?
Because there is nothing decent
about crashing the economy. When
Venezuela was floating on a lake of
Venezuela was ﬂoating on a lake of
oil, no
Venezuela was floating on a lake of
oil, no Venezuelan should be poor.
Please don’t make a comparison
between Great Britain and Venezuela.
That is absolutely ridiculous.
That is absolutely ridiculous. Let’s
get the history lesson right. It
get the history lasson right. It
wasn’t
get the history lesson right. It
wasn’t the Conservatives who did
this, it was the coalition
government. It was. Our make Nick
Gees
Clegg getting in bed with Cameron.
And what they did was, they didn’t
realise that the cost of austerity
is too much. Austerity is so
expensive because not only does it
destroy the lives of people in a
community, it affects their minds.
It affects their well—being. The
It affects their well-being. The
lack of
It affects their well—being. The
lack of libraries, the lack of
schooling, closing down of our high
streets. All of these things
happened, and as a person who has
worked in this area for more than
the last ten years, on and off over
the last 30 years, I can tell you
the last 30 years, I ran tell you
that the
the last 30 years, I can tell you
that the cost of austerity has
destroyed the community and made
people feel as though there is no
peopla feel as though there is no
future.
future. If you can’t feel you have
got a future, then it doesn’t matter
what a Conservative minister says.
The woman in the black headscarf?
Hello, I
Hello, Ijust wanted to also ask, in
your opinion, how much does the
your opinion, how much does thejob
your opinion, how much does the job
market at
your opinion, how much does thejob
market at present influence that
statistic? Which statistic? Life
expectancy going down. To what
extent does the gig economy, zero
hours, the lack of stability, to
what extent does that affect it as
well? In my opinion, it is not
well? In my opinion, it is notjust
well? In my opinion, it is not just
the NHS
well? In my opinion, it is notjust
the NHS and public services, it is
also the lack of family security,
the knowing how much you are going
to earn in any given month, being
unabla to
unable to call in sick because you
unabla to all in sick because you
are
unable to call in sick because you
are technically self—employed. That
are technically self-employed. That
is affecting
are technically self—employed. That
is affecting people as well. The job
market today is markedly different
to what it was ten years ago and
that is affecting people’s health
and mental health as well.
Why has the Prime Minister gone
exceptionally quiet about issues in
the north—east? I believe that some
the north-east? I believe that some
of these key
the north—east? I believe that some
of these key issues we are
discussing today, he has his vote on
the north—east, but he hasn’t really
the north-east, but he hasn’t really
lived up to
the north—east, but he hasn’t really
lived up to honouring his promise to
us. The man in the checked shirt.
Surely austerity has had something
to do with this because, if there
are cuts to children and adults’
mental health services, and male
suicide is one of the biggest
killers for men. Clearly that has
killers for men. Cleariy that has
dragged
killers for men. Clearly that has
dragged down the figure. Jon? That
dragged down the figure. jon? That
final point is
dragged down the figure. Jon? That
final point is so important. One
thing this report found is that what
the academics called the mortality
the academic rallad the mortality
rate, peopla
the academics called the mortality
rate, people dying, is increasing
rate, peopla dying, is increasing
for peopla in
rate, people dying, is increasing
for people in their 405,
particularly for suicide,
particularly forsuicide, drug
for people in their 405,
particularly for suicide, drug abuse
particularty for suicide, dmg abuse
and
particularly for suicide, drug abuse
and alcohol abuse. To answer the
original question, the simple answer
to your question is, yes, this
report is a devastating verdict on
ten years of Tory austerity. And
what this report says... Coalition.
There were a lot of toys in there!
What
what this
There were a lot of toys in there!
What this report says is that life
what this report says is that life
expectancy,
What this report says is that life
expectancy, which has generally
improved year by year for 100 years,
has ground to a halt virtually. You
are right to say that ten years ago
he did a report highlighting health
inequalities, but in the last ten
years life expectancy has virtually
ground to a halt and has actually
mn
run backwards the very poorest
mn backwards the very poorest
women.
run backwards the very poorest
women. One part of the country where
it is going backwards, where it is
most prevalent, is here in the
north—east. That is what is going on
north-east. That is what is going on
after ten years
north—east. That is what is going on
after ten years of austerity, and
it’s not just
it’s notjust about NHS funding,
it’s not just about NHS funding,
it’s
it’s notjust about NHS funding,
it’s about the fact that you have
cut liens from children’s and young
people’sservices, the steepest cuts
in the north—east. You have close
in the north-east. You have close
sure start
in the north—east. You have close
sure start centres. It’s about the
fact you have cut benefits so we
have charities reporting of children
scavenging in bins at school, and
child poverty has gone up to 4
million. You know what? It’s going
to get worse because more cuts are
coming that will push child poverty
“P
up to a higher level than it was
under john
underJohn Major, Margaret Thatcher,
under john Major, Margaret Thatcher,
the highest
underJohn Major, Margaret Thatcher,
the highest level since records
began since 1961, condemning future
generations to getting ill quicker
in life and dying sooner. That is
Tory austerity, and I’m afraid you
should be ashamed. Jon, given all
should be ashamed. jon, given all
that, why do
should be ashamed. Jon, given all
that, why do you think you persuaded
peopla, not in
people, not in Middlesbrough, but
peopla, not in Middlasbrough, but
around
people, not in Middlesbrough, but
around the area to vote? at that
elaction
election was devastating for the
elaction was devastating for the
labour
election was devastating for the
Labour Party. We got hammered, and
labour Party. We got hammered, and
there were
Labour Party. We got hammered, and
there were seats like north—west
there were seats like north-west
Durham,
there were seats like north—west
Durham, Bishop Auckland, Blyth
Valley, which were Labour Best heart
Valley, which were labour Best heart
and soil --
Valley, which were Labour Best heart
and soil —— Labour’s heart and soul.
and soil -- Labour’s heart and soul.
You are more likely
and soil —— Labour’s heart and soul.
You are more likely to see sugar
appear now than Boris
appear now than Borisjohnson. Many
appear now than Boris johnson. Many
of the
appear now than Borisjohnson. Many
of the constituencies
appear now than BorisJohnson. Many
of the constituencies that went from
labour to Tory
Labour to Tory are the
constituencies where these health
inequalities are getting wider and
wider. I used to come on your
programme and speak with great
eloquence, I hope, about the state
of things, but we didn’t convince
peopla.
people. We are having a leadership
election, as you know, and hopefully
with a new leader in place we will
be able to get out there and can
be able to get out there and ran
claim
daim again
be able to get out there and can
claim again and rebuild. We have a
big challenge on our hands and I
have to accept that, and we have to
understand why we felt people so
badly, because we did in this part
of the world, and we cannot allow
that
of the world, and we rannot allow
that again,
of the world, and we cannot allow
that again, because I want a Labour
that again, because I want a labour
government to
that again, because I want a Labour
government to deal with child
poverty.
poverty, the state of the NHS, and
my party cannot continue failing to
do
my party rannot continue failing to
do that.
my party cannot continue failing to
do that. Is an example of a Labour
do that. Is an example of a labour
government in
do that. Is an example of a Labour
government in Wales, and life
expectancy has increased much more
quickly in England than in Wales.
quickly in England than in Walas.
Mortality
quickly in England than in Wales.
Mortality rates amongst women in
labour
Labour run Wales have risen, despite
labour mn Wales have risen, despite
falling in both
Labour run Wales have risen, despite
falling in both England and
Scotland. This is not a party
political point. Scotland is doing
well on mortality rates whereas, in
labour mn
Labour run Wales, mortality amongst
labour mn Walas, mortality amongst
women
Labour run Wales, mortality amongst
women has risen under Labour in
women has risen under labour in
Walas.
women has risen under Labour in
Wales. Your
Wales. Yourfaux anger
women has risen under Labour in
Wales. Your faux anger is
Wales. Yourfaux anger is rubbish.
Walas. Your faux anger is rubbish.
Its
Wales. Your faux anger is rubbish.
Its genuine
Wales. Yourfaux anger is rubbish.
Its genuine anger about child
poverty! You get the chance to run
poverty! You get the chance to mn
Wales
poverty! You get the chance to run
Wales and
poverty! You get the chance to mn
Wales and you
poverty! You get the chance to run
Wales and you are running it into
Walas and you are mnning it into
the ground,
Wales and you are running it into
the ground, and Labour’s four—day
the ground, and Labour’s four-day
week
the ground, and Labour’s four—day
week would have... You are losing
the argument! 850,000 children... If
there are more children in poverty
because of your policies. Hang on, I
am getting deafened. The one thing I
don’t think you did, and Hamza
don’t think you did, and Hamu
Howie, was
don’t think you did, and Hamza
Howie, was answer the question. Is
the fall in life expectancy proof
that austerity kills, is the author
of the report suggests? Is it proof?
I don’t agree with Lord bird’s
point... Is it proof or isn’t it? We
had to balance the books. You didn’t
have to balance the books. If you
crash the economy, you hurt the
weakness. This is rubbish! There are
a whole group of people who say that
a whola group of peopla who say that
you ran trade
a whole group of people who say that
you can trade out of austerity. We
you ran trade out of austerity. We
went into
you can trade out of austerity. We
went into the Second World War with
not a penny in our pockets and, by
the end of it, we created an economy
where, if you borrow, spend to save.
That is the answer. And you, for
ideological reasons, went down the
road of what we are going to do is
live within our Thatcherite means,
and that helped to destroy the
prosperity of Britain. We borrowed
our way out of it in the Second
World War. For every £4 we were
spending, we were borrowing a plan.
Today, for every £22 we spent, we
borrow a pound. That is responsible.
THEY SPEAK OVER EACH OTHER.
Austerity is not the answer to every
problem in the world. Our society
has become more decadent and
developed, and you seem again and
again people become more secondary
again peopla become more secondary
and
again people become more secondary
and depressed, communities become
more fragmented, they would turn
more to abusive substances that make
them ill. As the lady over there was
saying, her
saying, herfamily went
them ill. As the lady over there was
saying, her family went through all
kinds of probation and suffering,
they are as strong as Oxis. It’s a
far more complex question. The world
is changing, and austerity is not a
silver bullet. That is what the
author of
author of the report said, and he
blamed austerity. Next week, we will
be in Tunbridge Wells, and the
following week is Budget weak and we
will be in West Bromwich. If you
want to come and be in the audience,
all us on
callus on this number or go to the
all us on this number or go to the
website.
ﬂ
I think we can talk about that
I think we ran talk about that
report in the
I think we can talk about that
report in the north probably for the
whole hour, but there are a lot of
other questions, so in fairness I am
going to move on and take a question
from Raymond Latus. After today’s
from Raymond latus. After todars
court ruling,
from Raymond Latus. After today’s
court ruling, should Heathrow
expansion go—ahead for trade
benefits or be stopped for
environmental reasons? Right, you
supported a third runway? So should
it go ahead?
supported a third runway? 50 should
it go ahead? Well, I think we need
to aviation investment in this
country. The same time, we need to
make sure we meet our climate
challenge of net zero by 2050. I am
the Business Minister, so a couple
of weeks ago I had a roundtable with
the Prince of Wales, the whole
aviation industry, and we are
looking to target to produce an
aircraft that can carry 180 people
aircraft that ran rarry180 peopla
to a 500
aircraft that can carry 180 people
to a 500 mile radius, so it covers
most of Europe, which will be fully
elactric.
electric. So will a third runway
elactric. So will a third runway
go-ahead?
electric. So will a third runway
go—ahead? Heathrow is a private
go-ahead? Heathrow is a private
country, and
go—ahead? Heathrow is a private
country, and that investment is
being made by a private company. ——
being made by a private company. --
private company.
being made by a private company. ——
private company. The legal challenge
today was successful, so I would not
want to comment on the legal
situation. The view of the
government is that aviation is
incredibly important. In our
levelling up, the question is, is it
important for trade? And it is. Nick
should it go ahead? After today’s
should it go ahead? After todars
court ruling,
should it go ahead? After today’s
court ruling, should Heathrow
expansion go—ahead for trade
benefits. For environmental reasons?
with
With Heathrow and the legal
challenge, I can’t comment on that.
challange, I can’t comment on that.
For
challenge, I can’t comment on that.
For aviation across the UK,
absolutely, we need to invest in it
as well as to meet our very, very
ambitious targets for net zero by
2050. We will be co—chairing COP26,
2050. We will be co-chairing (ions,
the
2050. We will be co—chairing COP26,
the climate summit, in Glasgow this
year, the end of the year, and we
have to make sure we do both of
those things and do them well. A lot
of the innovation is happening
within my department, and we are
investing to make sure we have
sustainable, clean aviation. I hear
sustainable, dean aviation. I hear
that, but
that, butl
sustainable, clean aviation. I hear
that, but I also hear you are not
answering the question. I said
aviation has to grow. You are saying
you don’t have a view on Heathrow
expanding! I think the environment
or site is extremely important and
dearty we
clearly we need do something
dearty we need do something
regarding
clearly we need do something
regarding that, and we shouldn’t
underplay how serious that
challenges for the globe, but
personally I think it should go
ahead because, without a strong
economy, without the investment
needed to sustain that future, we
won’t have that environment. The
woman in the middle. Does Gatwick
Airport not reduce the emissions if
you move it there? Did I read that
today? We are checking that. If
there is to be any investment,
should not be in the north—east, one
should not be in the north-east, one
of the most
should not be in the north—east, one
of the most deprived areas of the
country? --
country? —— should it not be.
country? -- should it not be.
Alison? I
country? —— should it not be.
Alison? I think today might go down
as a really key date in this
country, in its fightback for our
planet, really. What this legal
planet, really. what this legal
mling has
planet, really. What this legal
ruling has meant is that any big
mling has meant is that any big
project now
ruling has meant is that any big
project now is going to have to have
some consideration about the
environmental impact, and we cannot
environmental impact, and we rannot
just pretend this
environmental impact, and we cannot
just pretend this stuff isn’t
happening now. We have seen the
ﬂoods
floods of the last few weeks.
Elsewhere in the world, they have
seen this kind of thing for years,
and now it’s on our own front door,
we cannot ignore it. We also have to
think
we rannot ignore it. We also have to
think that
we cannot ignore it. We also have to
think that sometimes, yes, we need a
strong economy, yes, we need jobs,
and there are lots of
and there are lots ofjobs to be had
in the green industries, and lots of
money to be made, but the people who
money to be made, but the peopla who
mn this country
money to be made, but the people who
run this country have got to say,
mn this country have got to say,
you know
run this country have got to say,
you know what, sometimes things are
more important than money, like our
children’s futures, our communities,
there are things that matter more
than making money, and I think it
than making money, and Ithink it
leaves us
than making money, and I think it
leaves us in a difficult position,
because we know the Prime Minister
must review on Heathrow was that he
would
must review on Heatth was that he
would lay down
must review on Heathrow was that he
would lay down in front of
bulldozers. This is a really big
step forward for this country, as we
finally make a stand about what is
right for our future and our
children’s futures. John Bird. Are
children’s futures. john Bird. Are
used to
children’s futures. John Bird. Are
used to live under the flight path,
used to live under the ﬂight path,
so I
used to live under the flight path,
so I suffered. It’s a terrible place
to live if you live down on the
Thames Valley there, with all the
aeroplanes coming in and even more,
but I think the real issue to me,
and it’s why I’ve got a bill going
through
and it’s why I’ve got a hill going
through the
and it’s why I’ve got a bill going
through the house called the
wellbeing of future generations
bill, and this is to try and get
governments to grow up about not
doing short—term things. It’s a
doing short-term things. It’s a
really
doing short—term things. It’s a
really interesting and exciting idea
to have runway number three, because
it’s short—term real boost to the
it’s short-term real boost to the
economy, very
it’s short—term real boost to the
economy, very quickly, but the
long-term
long—term effects are just
devastating. You don’t want to be
enlarging Heathrow. You don’t want
to be enlarging all of the other
airports around the country with the
present technology. You need to be
putting your money and your effort,
like the American government are
doing, putting an enormous amount of
effort, especially in the military,
around how to produce clean planes.
around how to produce dean planes.
That kind
around how to produce clean planes.
That kind of money is not being put
in by their majesties government and
has never really been seriously put
in. If we want to do something
sensible, we need to stop this
generation destroying the next
generation, so that the next
generation has a poorer quality of
life, and I think that is the real
issue around whether we vote for a
third runway. I would not go for a
third runway. I’d spent the money on
our schools and on our libraries and
on our community in the north—east
on our community in the north-east
of England, and
on our community in the north—east
of England, and give our children
the opportunity of having jobs which
are not 5p, £10 an hour, but £50 an
are not 5p, £10 an hour, but 50 an
hour. If
are not So, £10 an hour, but 50 an
hour. If you are
are not 5p, £10 an hour, but £50 an
hour. If you are going to get
somebody out of poverty, give them a
bloody good job.
APPLAUSE
Yes. I am
Yes. lam really concerned
APPLAUSE
Yes. I am really concerned about
[oral transport
local transport with Teesside
[oral transport with Teesside
airport,
local transport with Teesside
airport, and what the council has
done, with business coming back to
Teesside, and hopefully then
bringing transport links back to the
north-east,
north—east, where we haven’t had any
north-east, where we haven’t had any
for years. HSZ
north—east, where we haven’t had any
for years. HS2 totally bypassing the
north—east. All that money that is
north-east. All that money that is
being piled
north—east. All that money that is
being piled into it, we are not
going to benefit at all, so it
should be invested into Teesside. So
the third runway is an irrelevance,
as far as you are concerned. The man
in the white shirt with the glasses.
Most peopla
Most people in Middlesbrough don’t
Most peopla in Middlesbrough don’t
really rare or
Most people in Middlesbrough don’t
really care or know that much about
really rare or know that much about
what happens
really care or know that much about
what happens at Heathrow, but I
think it’s wonderful that Teesside
airport is being reclaimed,
rejuvenated, and more services are
being provided every week. You are
baking it up for Teesside. Yes, the
man at the front in the dark shirt.
ﬂ
I think technology is the way
forward. As we have seen with cars
developing batteries and other
means, by the time this third runway
is built, we will have cleaner
planes, electric planes, and that
will be the way forward. I don’t
think you have to worry so much
about the emissions because by the
time it happens, technology will
have taught
have caught up and we will be in a
better place. So I think it should
go ahead. Ayesha? I think we should
try to use what we have, upgrade it
and make it more efficient, not
and make it more efficient, notjust
and make it more efficient, not just
build more
and make it more efficient, notjust
build more and more things. But I am
in favour of trying to spread out
the centres for hubs of transport,
like the lady was saying about
Teesside airport. That is fantastic.
I ﬂaw in
I flew in from Dubai to Newcastle
Iﬂew in from Dubai to Nemsﬂa
this morning.
I flew in from Dubai to Newcastle
this morning. Fantastic airport,
superefficient, great flight. The
superefficient, great ﬂight. The
whola
superefficient, great flight. The
whole thing works perfectly. And it
whola thing works perfectly. And it
is
whole thing works perfectly. And it
is because emirates is good and it
ﬂies
flies there. What two other airlines
ﬂies there. what two other airtines
are of
flies there. What two other airlines
are of course available! Why aren’t
are of course available! why aren’t
more
are of course available! Why aren’t
more airlines doing that? Why are we
more aidines doing that? why are we
not make
more airlines doing that? Why are we
not make it more attractive so that
peopla go to
people go to different hubs? They
are not always going to London. That
is why we want to make it more
attractive for people to go to
different places around the country.
And what about the environment? The
question was about trade benefits
versus the environmental impact.
where
Where does that stand in relation to
where does that stand in relation to
increasing
Where does that stand in relation to
increasing flights to other
increasing ﬂights to other
airports?
increasing flights to other
airports? It is not about increasing
so much as redistributing flights.
so much as redistributing ﬂights.
Having
so much as redistributing flights.
Having fewer to London. And more
going to [oral
going to local hubs. I don’t think
going to [oral hubs. I don’t think
this is going to
going to local hubs. I don’t think
this is going to happen now. If the
government wanted it to happen, it
would be part of the appeal. There
is an irony that the courts have
come to a judgment that suits Boris
johnson, for a
Johnson, for a change. But I have
johnson, for a change. But I have
suddenly
Johnson, for a change. But I have
suddenly enough change my mind on
Heathrow. I originally was persuaded
of the arguments around trade and
investment and the economic
argument. I remember meeting some of
the trade unions who represented the
Heathrow workforce. But the more I
have looked into it and the more I
have researched it, I cannot see how
it is compatible with our commitment
to climate change. We cannot deny
the challenge. With the flooding at
the challenge. with the ﬂooding at
the
the challenge. With the flooding at
the moment, we are seeing more and
more extreme weather events. We have
to get serious about the challenge
of climate change and what that
means for the future of humanity and
the future of the planet. On those
grounds, I hold my hands up and I am
saying that a few years ago when I
supported Heathrow, I
supported Heathrow, Iwas
saying that a few years ago when I
supported Heathrow, I was wrong.
supported Heathrow, Iwas wrong. Now
I don’t think it should go ahead.
jon, we are
Jon, we are putting £2 billion into
jon, we are putting £2 billion into
aviation
Jon, we are putting £2 billion into
aviation research. I would love to
invite you to show you what we are
doing. You probably need 4 billion.
I am so glad to hear people talking
I am so glad to hear peopla talking
about
I am so glad to hear people talking
about Teesside airport and what is
being done in terms of offshore wind
and the supply chain, but also our
traditional industries like the
steel industry. We have a big plan
to decarbonise not
to decarbonise notjust transport,
to dearbonise not just transport,
but also
to decarbonise notjust transport,
but also steel to make the greenest
steel in Europe. One more question
from Chris Kelly. The government
have promised to tackle the number
of rough sleepers. As a Salvation
Army officer in Middlesbrough, I
Army officer in Middlasbrough, I
have
Army officer in Middlesbrough, I
have seen an increase. When will we
have seen an increase. when will we
see that
have seen an increase. When will we
see that change? Chris, tell us
about your experience of seeing
rough sleeping in Middlesbrough. We
operate out of Southfield Road. We
are regularty
are regularly inundated with people
are regularty inundated with peopla
who
are regularly inundated with people
who have to use our services to get
food, to get clothing and other
support, drug addicts. And you have
support, dmg addicts. And you have
seen an
support, drug addicts. And you have
seen an increase? We have seen an
increase. There are people trying to
sleep around the back of our church
buildings, anywhere to get out of
the cold and the elements. And it
the cold and the elaments. And it
has
the cold and the elements. And it
has increased, yet we are being told
it is a decrease. Well, it has
decreased this year by 9%. But it
decreased this year by 996. But it
has nearty
decreased this year by 9%. But it
has nearly tripled since the
Conservatives, or since 2010, which
was a coalition with the
Conservatives, and then a
Conservative government. John Bird,
Conservative government. john Bird,
you’re the
Conservative government. John Bird,
you’re the obvious person to talk to
about this. In terms of the impact
of rough sleeping on someone... I am
of rough shaping on someone... I am
an ex-rough
of rough sleeping on someone... I am
an ex—rough sleeper, and I can
an ex-rough sleeper, and I ran
honestly tell
an ex—rough sleeper, and I can
honestly tell you that it’s one of
the worst things you can be doing.
the worst things you ran be doing.
If you are a
the worst things you can be doing.
If you are a rough sleeper for a
couple of months, it takes years to
get it out of you. Even a couple of
weeks will disenfranchise you in
many ways and confusing.
many ways and confusing. —— confuse
many ways and confusing. -- confuse
you. I
you. lam an
many ways and confusing. —— confuse
you. I am an ex—offender who ended
you. I am an ex-offender who ended
“P
up on the streets,
you. I am an ex—offender who ended
up on the streets, hiding from the
police and hiding from my family, so
I wasn’t like a lot of the young
peopla now.
people now. But I can honestly tell
peopla now. But I ran honestly tell
you that in
people now. But I can honestly tell
you that in those days, no one was
allowed to sleep rough, because you
got nicked. And if you got nicked,
you went into prisons. And then
after a few months, you were let
out. That was a ridiculous
situation, but the ridiculous
situation we have now, where we have
an overspill of the A&E department,
we have an overspill of the social
security office, we have an
overspill of all the help that
charities can give. 50 you have got
charities ran give. So you have got
this compound
charities can give. 50 you have got
this compound that is terrible. It
is a human rights abuse, in my
opinion, to let anybody sleep on the
streets. I would not let one person
sleep on the streets. I would create
therapeutic communities, and I would
give people places of safety where
give P P
Peo
ty "h
[e laces 01 sale are
give people places of safety where
you then sort out the problems. I
you then sort out the problams. I
would
you then sort out the problems. I
would transfer the whole argument to
the idea that this is about social
health and social well—being. But it
health and social well-being. But it
comes
health and social well—being. But it
comes out of austerity. We know it
comes out of all the problems that
comes out of all the problams that
peopla have
comes out of all the problems that
people have had around Universal
peopla have had around Universal
Credit.
people have had around Universal
Credit. We know it comes out of the
fact that the A&E departments are
overfull. We know these things. The
answer in my opinion is that we have
to stop allowing people on the
streets, and we have to give them an
alternative, irrespective of whether
they want to take it or not. They
are in a health problem. They have
mental and physical health problems
mental and physical health problams
and it is
mental and physical health problems
and it is an absolute abhorrence
that we love people to live and die
that we love peopla to live and die
on
that we love people to live and die
on the streets.
on the streets. The young woman with
blonde hair?
blonde hair? Personally, I have had
experts with mental health and
hearing this today, I think some of
you are in a different world, saying
you have come in from Dubai to
Newcastle. In Middlesbrough, the
Nemsﬂa. In Middlasbrough, the
lack of
Newcastle. In Middlesbrough, the
lack of funding for mental health is
destroying our communities. Even
when you do seek help, I read
somewhere that there have been three
deaths recently in our mental health
hospitals. So
hospitals. 50 when people are
hospitals. So when peopla are
receiving
hospitals. 50 when people are
receiving help, they are being let
down. It has destroyed our
community. Addiction is on the rise.
Mental health crises are on the rise
in rough sleeping is on the rise. We
need funding, and when are we going
to get it? Alison?
to get it? Alison? Again, it is the
second time we have come back to the
austerity issue today. Homelessness
is a tragedy. Today was bitterly
is a tragedy. Today was hitherty
cold
is a tragedy. Today was bitterly
cold and I saw this young girl and
cold and I saw this young girt and
she was
cold and I saw this young girl and
she was set
she was satin a sleeping bag, which
she was sat in a shaping bag, which
was wet
she was satin a sleeping bag, which
was wet from the ground and she
she was sat in a sleeping bag, which
was wet from the ground and she was
frozen. This should not be something
we are seeing on our streets in one
of the richest nations on earth. How
is this happening? The work that the
Salvation Army and those great
charities do is fantastic, but it
has to be more than that. There are
so many issues coming into this. We
have got abuse of drugs, we have
lack of organisations that care for
lack of organisations that rare for
peopla and
lack of organisations that care for
people and we also have a massive
peopla and we also have a massive
housing crisis.
people and we also have a massive
housing crisis. Rough sleeping is
housing crisis. Rough slaeping is
the tip of
housing crisis. Rough sleeping is
the tip of the iceberg. That is what
we see when we see people in
we see when we see peopla in
shaping
we see when we see people in
sleeping bags in doorways. Beneath
shaping bags in doorways. Beneath
that,
sleeping bags in doorways. Beneath
that, we have thousands of children
living in temporary accommodation,
sofa surfing. They have no
stability, and all the mental health
issues that go along that. This is
going to cost billions of pounds to
fix and a major overhaul of our
housing system. We need homes for
families to live in. Ayesha. Some of
the audience think you are on a
different planet. 5’ I can assure
different planet. 5’ I ran assure
you I am
you lam not,
different planet. 5’ I can assure
you I am not, though I do sometimes
you lam not, though I do sometimes
work in Dubai,
you I am not, though I do sometimes
work in Dubai, which means I do fly
work in Dubai, which means I do ﬂy
from Dubai.
work in Dubai, which means I do fly
from Dubai. But for
from Dubai. But fora
work in Dubai, which means I do fly
from Dubai. But for a long time, I
from Dubai. But fora long time, I
had
from Dubai. But for a long time, I
had a relationship with someone who
had been made homeless when he was a
child. So
child. Sol
had been made homeless when he was a
child. 50 I was very aware of the
child. So I was very aware of the
destabilising
child. 50 I was very aware of the
destabilising effect that that can
destabilising effect that that ran
have
destabilising effect that that can
have on someone. I have been close
to people who have been through that
to peopla who have been through that
sort of
to people who have been through that
sort of privation, and I couldn’t
agree more that this is a disgrace
within our highly developed,
affluent society, to walk past
afﬂuent society, to walk past
peopla in
affluent society, to walk past
people in doorways, shivering. It is
unbelievable. Something has to be
done. We need to open up town halls.
There just shouldn’t be another
night that people don’t have
somewhere to go at all times. I am
1001:
100% with
somewhere to go at all times. I am
10096 with you
100% with you on that. Should
10096 with you on that. Should
politicians
100% with you on that. Should
politicians be ashamed about the
destruction of the youth services
that will exacerbate this problem?
You think the lack of youth services
is partly to blame. Jon? This is
heartbreaking. Thank you, Chris, for
the work you do with the Salvation
Army. I know you will be out there
in the cold at night time, looking
after and supporting people in the
after and supporting peopla in the
most
after and supporting people in the
most desperate circumstances. There
is a disagreement about the exact
number, but I think we all know that
the numbers of people sleeping rough
the numbers of peopla shaping rough
on our
the numbers of people sleeping rough
on our streets has gone sky high in
the last ten years. We know local
authorities have had their budgets
dosed
closed and have often had to close
closed and have often had to dose
beds in
closed and have often had to close
beds in hospitals. We all know there
are over 100,000 children pushed
from pillar to post in temporary
accommodation, not given a permanent
home, not knowing where their next
meal is coming from. This is surely
a shameful stain on the soul of this
country, when we are one of the
wealthiest countries in the world.
We should be getting a grip of this
problem and putting more money in.
The point that was made by someone
in the audience about mental health
services, we know that many of the
people who are sleeping rough do
peopla who are shaping rough do
have a
people who are sleeping rough do
have a desperate need for proper
mental health care. They are often
mental health rare. They are often
grappling
mental health care. They are often
grappling with a serious addiction
problam,
problem, whether it be substance
problam, whether it be substance
misuse
problem, whether it be substance
misuse or alcohol, and yet there
health budgets for drug and alcohol
health budgets for dmg and alcohol
have
health budgets for drug and alcohol
have been decimated under the
Tories. Indeed, every local
Tories. Indeed, every [oral
authority in
Tories. Indeed, every local
authority in the country still
doesn’t know what its budget will be
this April because the government
have not got around to telling them.
It is a disgrace. The government
have to do something. Nadhim, you
can’t be happy that rough sleeping
can’t be happy that rough shaping
has hearty
can’t be happy that rough sleeping
has nearly tripled since 2010. It is
has nearty tripled since 2010. It is
unacceptable
has nearly tripled since 2010. It is
unacceptable that anyone should be
sleeping rough in our country. Do
shaping rough in our country. Do
you take
sleeping rough in our country. Do
you take responsibility for it? We
do, and today we announced an
additional £236 million to deliver
another 6000 places in accommodation
for peoplc who
for people who are sleeping rough,
for peopla who are shaping rough,
bringing the
for people who are sleeping rough,
bringing the total to 1.2 billion
now. The lady asked about mental
health. You are right. I have seen
it when I was children’s minister.
There is some excellent work being
done. I went to Leeds council, who
put wraparound services around
anyone before they even become
homeless and a rough sleeper,
because there are signs. One of them
is obviously mental health. And they
put a team around them to keep them
in their accommodation. So there are
good examples and we are learning
from that and putting more money
into it. The prime minister is
committed to this. I want every
child to wake up in their own home
and have a healthy meal I go to
school and do all the things that we
want for our own children. The
Salvation Army do phenomenal work,
but we have got to tackle this.
but we have got to tackle this. We
but we have got to tackla this. We
have put
but we have got to tackle this. We
have put another £34 billion of
additional spending to the NHS.
Mental health budgets are going up
as well. And the largest increase in
a decade into local government that
a decade into [oral government that
we have just
a decade into local government that
we have just announced.
we havejust announced. But
a decade into local government that
we have just announced. But it is
not just about money,
notjust about money, it is learning
not just about money, it is learning
from the
notjust about money, it is learning
from the best examples, learning
what works and then putting in that
wraparound service. You see it in
[oral
local authorities. Leeds cut down
[oral authorities. Leeds cut down
their
local authorities. Leeds cut down
their homelessness by a third
because of the level of work they
have put in. That is what we need to
invest in and we are making that
investment. We announced the
additional 236 million today. Our
time is up, I’m afraid. Lots of you
have your hands up, so forgive me
for not coming to you. Next week, we
will be in Tunbridge Wells.
The following week, we will be in
West Bromwich, so do come and join
us. (“all if you
us. Call if you want to be in the
us. (“all if you want to be in the
audience, or go
us. Call if you want to be in the
audience, or go to the website. If
you want to carry
you want to carry on the topic of
conversation or the others we have
been talking about tonight, you can
been talking about tonight, you ran
have your say
been talking about tonight, you can
have your say with Adrian Chiles and
guests on Question Time extra time.
But here in the spring, thank you to
the panel. Thank you to all of you
for your questions and the points
you have made, and thank you to you
at home for watching and listening.
From Middlesbrough, bye—bye.
You have never met a man
likeJimJones.
My father was building
a new kingdom for himself.
The more power he got,
the darker the story got.
910 died...
Family means new arrivals
and starting again.
Burying the past
and living with the consequences.
Because whatever life
throws at you...
SIREN BLARES
..family...
Right, take that, Friends reunion —
it’s a Brexitcast reunion,
right here, right now.
You don’t even have to wait for it.
Except we will be
narking about who’s who.
Like every Friends conversation
within about 30 seconds!
What did you conclude?
You are the Monica.
You decided I’m not even
remotely obsessive, I don’t
know what you’re talking
about and I’m completely calm.
I really don’t see why
that would be the case.
Laura, you are the Rachel.
I tried to have her haircut in 1999,
which didn’t make me look like her.
Didn’t we all!
Friends completely passed me
by the first time out, entirely,
so I’ve never actually seen...
What?
I have to admit it, I’ve never seen
an episode of Friends.
Do you even know what
we’re talking about?
I am aware of said TV
programme of some years ago,
and I am aware of how popular it is,
and this whole business
of it coming back.
That’s amazing!
Chris, you are to Friends
as a normal person is to the Brexit
process, aware of it but...
I think Chris should be the ditzy
one with the guitar.
Phoebe.
Yeah.
Everyone agreed I was the Ross,
and I said I’d rather be Gunther.
Welcome to Newscast,
a quasi—Brexitcast.
Newscast.
Newscast from the BBC.